“We Don’t Want Any Trouble”
Published in Galaxy Science Fiction, Vol. 6, No. 3 (June 1953), illustrated by Ed Emshmiller,
though this version is taken from Eternal Frontier (2002) and has suffered unknown amounts of
editing.
“Well, that wasn’t a very long interview, was it?” asked the professor’s wife. She’d discovered
the professor looking out of the living room window when she’d come home from shopping just
now. “I wasn’t counting on having dinner before nine,” she said, setting her bundles down on
the couch. “I’ll get at it right away.”
“No hurry about dinner,” the professor replied without turning his head. “I didn’t expect we’d
be through there before eight myself.”
He had clasped his hands on his back and was swaying slowly, backward and forward on his
feet, staring out at the street. It was a favorite pose of his, and she never had discovered
whether it indicated deep thought or just daydreaming. At the moment, she suspected
uncomfortably it was very deep thought, indeed. She took off her hat.
“I suppose you could call it an interview,” she said uneasily. “I mean you actually talked with it,
didn’t you?”
“Oh, yes, we talked with it,” he nodded. “Some of the others did, anyway.”
“Imagine talking with something like that! It really is from another world, Clive?” She laughed
uneasily, watching the back of his head with frightened eyes. “But, of course, you can’t violate
the security rules, can you? You can’t tell me anything about it at all. . . .”
He shrugged, turning around. “There’ll be a newscast at six o’clock. In ten minutes. Wherever
there’s a radio or television set on Earth, everybody will hear what we found out in that
interview. Perhaps not quite everything, but almost everything.”
“Oh?” she said in a surprised, small voice. She looked at him in silence for a moment, her eyes
growing more frightened. “Why would they do a thing like that?”
“Well,” said the professor, “it seemed like the right thing to do. The best thing, at any rate.
There may be some panic, of course.” He turned back to the window and gazed out on the
street, as if something there were holding his attention. He looked thoughtful and abstracted,
she decided. But then a better word came to her, and it was “resigned.”
“Clive,” she said, almost desperately, “what happened?”
He frowned absently at her and walked to the radio. It began to make faint, humming noises as
the professor adjusted dials unhurriedly. The humming didn’t vary much.
“They’ve cleared the networks, I imagine,” he remarked.
The sentence went on repeating itself in his wife’s mind, with no particular significance at first.
But then a meaning came into it and grew and swelled swiftly, until she felt her head would
burst with it. They’ve cleared the networks. All over the world this evening, they’ve cleared the
networks. Until the newscast comes on at six o’clock. . . .
“As to what happened,” she heard her husband’s voice saying, “that’s a little difficult to
understand or explain. Even now. It was certainly amazing—” He interrupted himself. “Do you
remember Milt Caldwell, dear?”
“Milt Caldwell?” She searched her mind blankly. “No,” she said, shaking her head.
“A rather well-known anthropologist,” the professor informed her, with an air of faint reproach.
“Milt got himself lost in the approximate center of the Australian deserts some two years ago.
Only we have been told he didn’t get lost. They picked him up—”
“They?” she said. “You mean there’s more than one?”
“Well, there would be more than one, wouldn’t there?” he asked reasonably. “That explains, at
any rate, how they learned to speak English. It made it seem a little more reasonable, anyhow,”
he added, “when it told us that. Seven minutes to six. . . .”
“What?” she said faintly.
“Seven minutes to six,” the professor repeated. “Sit down, dear. I believe I can tell you, in seven
minutes, approximately what occurred. . . .”
The Visitor from Outside sat in its cage, its large gray hands slackly clasping the bars. Its
attitudes and motions, the professor had noted in the two minutes since he had entered the
room with the other men, approximated those of a rather heavily built ape. Reporters had
called it “the Toad from Mars,” on the basis of the first descriptions they’d had of it—the flabby
shape and loose, warty skin made that a vaguely adequate identification. The round, horny
head almost could have been that of a lizard.
With a zoologist’s fascination in a completely new genus, the professor catalogued these
contradicting physical details in his mind. Yet something somewhat like this might have been
evolved on Earth, if Earth had chosen to let the big amphibians of its Carboniferous Period go
on evolving.
That this creature used human speech was the only almost-impossible feature.
It had spoken as they came in. “What do you wish to know?” it asked. The horny, toothed jaws
moved, and a broad yellow tongue became momentarily visible, forming the words. It was a
throaty, deliberate “human” voice.
For a period of several seconds, the human beings seemed to be shocked into silence by it,
though they had known the creature had this ability. Hesitantly, then, the questioning began.
The professor remained near the back of the room, watching. For a while, the questions and
replies he heard seemed to carry no meaning to him. Abruptly he realized that his thoughts
were fogged over with a heavy, cold, physical dread of this alien animal. He told himself that
under such circumstances fear was not an entirely irrational emotion, and his understanding of
it seemed to lighten its effects a little.
But the scene remained unreal to him, like a badly lit stage on which the creature in its
glittering steel cage stood out in sharp focus, while the humans were shadow-shapes stirring
restlessly against a darkened background.
“This won’t do!” he addressed himself, almost querulously, through the fear. “I’m here to
observe, to conclude, to report—I was selected as a man they could trust to think and act
rationally!”
He turned his attention deliberately away from the cage and what it contained, and he directed
it on the other human beings, to most of whom he had been introduced only a few minutes
before. A young, alert-looking Intelligence major, who was in some way in charge of this
investigation; a sleepy-eyed general; a very pretty captain acting as stenographer, whom the
major had introduced as his fiancee. The handful of other scientists looked for the most part
like brisk business executives, while the two Important Personages representing the
government looked like elderly professors.
He almost smiled. They were real enough. This was a human world. He returned his attention
again to the solitary intruder in it.
“Why shouldn’t I object?” the impossible voice was saying with a note of lazy good humor.
“You’ve caged me like—a wild animal! And you haven’t even informed me of the nature of the
charges against me. Trespassing, perhaps—eh?”
The wide mouth seemed to grin as the Thing turned its head, looking them over one by one
with bright black eyes. The grin was meaningless; it was the way the lipless jaws set when the
mouth was closed. But it gave expression to the pleased malice the professor sensed in the
voice and words.
The voice simply did not go with that squat animal shape.
Fear surged up in him again. He found himself shaking.
If it looks at me now, he realized in sudden panic, I might start to scream!
One of the men nearest the cage was saying something in low, even tones. The captain flipped
over a page of her shorthand pad and went on writing, her blonde head tilted to one side. She
was a little pale, but intent on her work. He had a moment of bitter envy for their courage and
self-control. But they’re insensitive, he tried to tell himself; they don’t know Nature and the
laws of Nature. They can’t feel as I do how wrong all this is!
Then the black eyes swung around and looked at him.
Instantly, his mind stretched taut with blank, wordless terror. He did not move, but afterward
he knew he did not faint only because he would have looked ridiculous before the others, and
particularly in the presence of a young woman. He heard the young Intelligence officer speaking
sharply; the eyes left him unhurriedly, and it was all over.
“You indicate,” the creature’s voice was addressing the major, “that you can force me to reveal
matters I do not choose to reveal at this time. However, you are mistaken. For one thing, a
body of this type does not react to any of your drugs.”
“It will react to pain!” the major said, his voice thin and angry.
Amazed by the words, the professor realized for the first time that he was not the only one in
whom this being’s presence had aroused primitive, irrational fears. The other men had stirred
restlessly at the major’s threat, but they made no protest.
The Thing remained silent for a moment, looking at the major.
“This body will react to pain,” it said then, “only when I choose to let it feel pain. Some of you
here know the effectiveness of hypnotic blocks against pain. My methods are not those of
hypnosis, but they are considerably more effective. I repeat, then, that for me there is no pain,
unless I choose to experience it.”
“Do you choose to experience the destruction of your body’s tissues?” the major inquired, a
little shrilly.
The captain looked up at him quickly from the chair where she sat, but the professor could not
see her expression. Nobody else moved.
The Thing, still staring at the major, almost shrugged.
“And do you choose to experience death?” the major cried, his face flushed with excitement.
In a flash of insight, the professor understood why no one was interfering. Each in his own way,
they had felt what he was feeling: that here was something so outrageously strange and new
that no amount of experience, no rank, could guide a human being in determining how to deal
with it. The major was dealing with it—in however awkward a fashion. With no other solution
to offer, they were, for the moment, unable or unwilling to stop him.
The Thing then said slowly and flatly, “Death is an experience I shall never have at your hands.
That is a warning. I shall respond to no more of your threats. I shall answer no more questions.
“Instead, I shall tell you what will occur now. I shall inform my companions that you are as we
judged you to be—foolish, limited, incapable of harming the least of us. Your world and
civilization are of very moderate interest. But they are a novelty which many will wish to view
for themselves. We shall come here and leave here, as we please. If you attempt to interfere
again with any of us, it will be to your own regret.”
“Will it?” the major shouted, shaking. “Will it now?”
The professor jerked violently at the quick successive reports of a gun in the young officer’s
hand. Then there was a struggling knot of figures around the major, and another man’s voice
was shouting hoarsely, “You fool! You damned hysterical fool!”
The captain had dropped her notebook and clasped her hands to her face. For an instant, the
professor heard her crying, “Jack! Jack! Stop—don’t—”
But he was looking at the thing that had fallen on its back in the cage, with the top of its skull
shot away and a dark-brown liquid staining the cage floor about its shoulders.
What he felt was an irrational satisfaction, a warm glow of pride in the major’s action. It was as
if he had killed the Thing himself.
For that moment, he was happy.
Because he stood far back in the room, he saw what happened then before the others did.
One of the Personages and two of the scientists were moving excitedly about the cage, staring
down at the Thing. The others had grouped around the chair into which they had forced the
major. Under the babble of confused, angry voices, he could sense the undercurrent of almost
joyful relief he felt himself.
The captain stood up and began to take off her clothes.
She did it quickly and quietly. It was at this moment, the professor thought, staring at her in
renewed terror, that the height of insanity appeared to have been achieved in this room. He
wished fervently that he could keep that sense of insanity wrapped around him forevermore,
like a protective cloak. It was a terrible thing to be rational! With oddly detached curiosity, he
also wondered what would happen in a few seconds when the others discovered what he
already knew.
The babbling voices of the group that had overpowered the major went suddenly still. The
three men at the cage turned startled faces toward the stillness. The girl straightened up and
stood smiling at them.
The major began screaming her name.
There was another brief struggling confusion about the chair in which they were holding him.
The screaming grew muffled as if somebody had clapped a hand over his mouth.
“I warned you,” the professor heard the girl say clearly, “that there was no death. Not for us.”
Somebody shouted something at her, like a despairing question. Rigid with fear, his own blood
a swirling roar in his ears, the professor did not understand the words. But he understood her
reply.
“It could have been any of you, of course,” she nodded. “But I just happened to like this body.”
After that, there was one more shot.
The professor turned off the radio. For a time, he continued to gaze out the window.
“Well, they know it now!” he said. “The world knows it now. Whether they believe it or not—
At any rate. . . .” His voice trailed off. The living room had darkened and he had a notion to
switch on the lights, but decided against it. The evening gloom provided an illusion of security.
He looked down at the pale oval of his wife’s face, almost featureless in the shadows.
“It won’t be too bad,” he explained, “if not too many of them come. Of course, we don’t know
how many there are of them, actually. Billions, perhaps. But if none of our people try to make
trouble—the aliens simply don’t want any trouble.”
He paused a moment. The death of the young Intelligence major had not been mentioned in
the broadcast. Considering the issues involved, it was not, of course, a very important event
and officially would be recorded as a suicide. In actual fact, the major had succeeded in
wresting a gun from one of the men holding him. Another man had shot him promptly without
waiting to see what he intended to do with it.
At all costs now, every rational human being must try to prevent trouble with the Visitors from
Outside.
He felt his face twitch suddenly into an uncontrollable grimace of horror.
“But there’s no way of being absolutely sure, of course,” he heard his voice tell the silently
gathering night about him, “that they won’t decide they just happen to like our kind of bodies.”